the highly anticipated truce between
Israel and Hamas is now underway this is
the scene live looking over Gaza from
Southern Israel a 4-day temporary
ceasefire appears to be holding ahead of
an anticipated hostage prisoner swap
later today it follows weeks of the most
intense fighting in the Israeli Hamas
conflict now after such major
destruction on the stet it's hardly a
return to normality for the people of
Gaza but this pause in hostilities is
allowing some now to move about with
relative
Freedom after weeks under bombardment
people are back on the streets across
the Gaza Street like here in K Yunis in
the South the 4day truce may be fragile
but even a short break in fighting is
welcome we look at the truth as a way to
breathe after 45 or 48 days of suffering
for us gazans I'm from Gaza City and I
was displaced to Rafa I hope the truth
is taken effect in all of gaza's trip in
order to see my demolished house and
what's left of
it just like Haled many Palestinians who
fled southwards have been hoping to use
theal in fighting to return to their
homes in the
north but Israeli planes have dropped
lifl lets warning against
that I don't think we can go back to
Gaza City at this moment because of that
announcement from the Israeli
army they are forbidding the displace
living in the south from heading
north at the Rafa Crossing on Egypt Gaza
border eight tracks have been entering
the
territory this was a key component of
truth and they'll be bringing much
needed Fuel and food supplies for as
long as the ceasefire
lasts we had a lot of losses this will
let people breathe move eat and drink
because the situation is difficult and
all Resident from the north are in Rafa
without food and
water I hope it's a chance for people to
live and move around and we wish it's an
introduction for a permanent truth
Israeli armored vehicles have been
filmed heading away from the
territory but Israel's military has
warned that its troops are going
nowhere and that the war against Hamas
is not
over well for gaza's 2 million plus
residents the truce brings some hope of
a rest bite from weeks of sustained
Israeli bombardment and shortages of
basic supplies now now as we've heard uh
fuel tankers and a trucks have begun
entering the Gaza Strip from Egypt
through the Rafa Crossing Egypt says
130,000 L of diesel and four trucks of
gas will be delivered daily to Gaza as
well as 200 trucks of other Aid now the
Israeli blockade of fuel has made it
virtually impossible for hospitals and
other basic services to operate inside
the
territory well for more uh let's speak
now to journalist kareim Al guari who
joins us from Cairo Kareem thanks for
joining us on DW news so what is the
latest that you can tell us about the
situation at the Rafa border
crossing well Egyptian authorities says
that the agreement is that over the next
four days
130,000 L of diesel and gas will cross
uh the strip uh the need on the other
side de to just run the basics things in
Gaza is about double the amount but that
is what's allowed for this next uh 4
days they will allow 200 trucks a day
with uh relief Aid the first uh fuel
trucks already went over uh this morning
and uh we are expecting also that about
a 100 Palestinian injured people will
cross over to be treated in in Egyptian
hospitals the first 20 of them already
entered Egypt this morning since the TRU
now Kareem um you've mentioned fuel
there but what kind of supplies are also
being delivered apart from
fuel fuel very important uh cooking gas
for the first time uh since uh seven
weeks that they can get cooking gas of
course like other things like water
urgently needed caned food tents and
other medical
supplies all right okay um now tell us
about the urgency um in Gaza for this
material well we have a cameraman who's
working for us here in Ciro and in in in
the southern Gaza Strip and he sent us
pictures yesterday and there's basically
three things that are urgently needed
one of them is electricity and uh and uh
fuel um he sent us pictures how people
are like the car batteries are basically
the essential supplies in in Gaza right
now people charging their phones and
charging their power banks with car
batteries and what's the car batteries
for the energy supplies are the donkeys
for transport most of the goods and most
of the persons who are transported right
now are transported by Donkey cards
because also no petrol available and the
last big issue is water they're saying
like the water is not fit for drinking
they're having there and also not enough
for the basic hygiene one woman said to
us that once in two weeks she's able to
take a shower right now kareim what does
this first day of this pause in fighting
mean for
Palestinians well you can see big relief
the pictures we can see out there is for
the first time children playing on the
streets people going out and about
without fear um of course lots of people
trying to get to their houses uh that
were destroyed also partially in the
southern Gaza Strip trying to get out
basic needs they have from their houses
and one of the problems is of course the
people are doing the same thing and
trying to get into to the houses in the
northern Gaza Strip which the Israeli
Army has forbidden and that right now is
I think the biggest point of friction uh
this border the Israelis draw drew
between the northern and the southern
Gaza Strip that is a friction point that
might actually even endanger uh the Seas
fire it
all thank you kareim journalist kareim
El guari in
Cairo well for the families of those
hostages held by Hamas in Gaza the past
few weeks have been Riven with Despair
and Trauma now the truce could see some
of them safely returned at
last after weeks of waiting the families
of hostages hope their loved ones will
come home soon I want to hope I hope
hope hope that it's going to happen
we've been on such a roller coaster for
the past certainly the past uh week but
since October 7th between Despair and
Trauma and
hope I just want to see the children
come back the Hamas terror group has
agreed to release 50 civilian Women and
Children of which 13 are to be released
in the first batch on Friday in exchange
Israel is set to release 150 Palestinian
prisoners mostly females and teenage
males over the course of the truce the
deal mediated by Kar also includes a
4-day pause in fighting in both the
North and South of the Gaza Strip as
well as increased humanitarian
Aid even though the agreement is
considered a breakthrough both sides
have remained cautious about saying too
much before it
materializes uh based on current
circumstances with the start of this
truce our main hope is that this
humanitarian truce will give us all the
opportunity to look into the bigger task
which is to implement a permanent truth
and Achieve long-lasting
peace efforts are being made to extend
the truth beyond the 4-day period but
Israel insists it will resume its
military operation in Gaza until it has
eradicated
Hamas Let's cross over to Mike Martin
now he's a former British army officer
and Senior fellow now in the department
of War studies at Kings College London
Mike the ceasefire has begun how fragile
is it what should we be watching out
for uh it's very fragile um the thing
that you need to look out for are
effectively spoilers to the deal so
these are people who weren't included in
the deal and they might be people within
Hamas so different factions within Hamas
Hamas obviously has a cellular structure
so it's not like a an army with with
direct command and control and also
other factions like Palestinian Islamic
Jihad um they haven't been mentioned at
all so I don't even know whether they're
included in the deal and they hold their
own hostages and they may also wish to
Scupper the deal so those are the things
that we need to keep an eye
on what about the what's happening on
the ground there in the Gaza Strip is
the Israeli military staying there
during this pause in the fighting or are
they expected to actually pull some of
their troops out for now
oh no they are all everyone's staying in
position it is literally stop firing
even if you are you know a couple of
hundred meters away from people that
you've been firing at before 7:00 local
time um the one difference is and this
was built into the deal uh Hamas
insisted as part of the deal that the
Israelis would stop overflights of the
Gaza Strip so that they were able to
move the prisoners without giving away
uh their military positions or or
perhaps where the other prisoners were
and that is part of the deal so Israel
won't be while the deal is on while the
prisoners are being moved won't be
overflying uh I think the northern part
of the Gaza
Strip okay we're looking at an exchange
of hostages and prisoners coming up
that's supposed to start happening this
afternoon walk us through the steps
involved in that exchange the way that
it's set up in this deal it must be
quite
complicated uh it it's hugely
complicated the the main issue is trust
neither side trusts each other so even
if accidents happen someone's weapon
goes off uh the problem is that the
other side will assume that they're
attacking and then the ceasefire will be
broken um both sides will need to bring
prisoners to an exchange Point um and
what assumes that will be on the border
um of the Gaza strip um for the Israelis
that's fairly easy but for uh Hamas
they've got these prisoners dispersed um
they're likely to be underground and
they need to move them we just spoke
about Israel overflying they need to
move them to The Exchange Point without
Israel knowing where they've come from
and when when they get to that exchange
Point both sides will want to secure
their side of it and both sides will
then set themselves up with a distance
in between them where they can show each
others the prisoners and so that they
can then exchange them it's horrendously
complicated and fraught with uh
potential issues both accidents and some
of the spoilers that we spoke about
earlier so a complex deal we're talking
about here it was weeks in the making a
lot of negotiations those negotiations
took place in Doha the capital of Q talk
to us about the role of Q in brokering
this deal Mike they're playing an an
essential role aren't
they yeah I think really it comes back
to trust Terry and the qataris really at
the end of the day were the only side uh
the only the only actors really that
both sides could trust enough to get
this deal over the line obviously the
qataris uh host at times part of the
Hamas leadership but the qataris have
also over the preceding years built up a
good enough relationship with the
Israelis that they can act as a mediator
and I think actually we we can see this
is a role the qataris see themselves
taking on they've played a a few other
roles like this in Libya and in Syria at
a much lower level and I think this is a
role that they see for themselves in the
region and on the world stage Mike thank
you very much for your analysis there
that was Mike Martin of Kings College
London well with me here in the studio
is our Middle East analyst Sha rosanis
so shy we're now into the ceasefire it
has begun it's supposed to go on for 4
days at least that's the plan so right
now it could be extended we understand
but uh what are you expecting to happen
when the ceasefire ends well first of
all it depends on when it ends I mean if
this going to last only for four days
it's going to be much easier for Israeli
IDF forces the military to regain
momentum to go back they still have some
parts of the northern part of the street
they they say that they still need to uh
uh clear out from from Terror um what
they say Terror uh terrorists of Hamas
um and then we will see them trying
definitely to go into the southern part
of the street with the main goal is
hunas this is where hamas's stronghold
is where lots of the leaders are coming
from that will happen if this only lasts
for 4 days good chances though this
won't last only for four days we've
already seen yesterday there was a bit
of a delay um some of it is considered
to be part of as psychological warfare
or some manipulations that they're
trying to pull they might try to do it
again because there is a scheme that is
agreed upon a formula which says that
for every 10 days the Hamas is willing
to provide and or Hest the habas is
willing to release Israel is giving 24
hours more of ceasefire what if Hamas
comes to Israel and says actually we
only have eight what's now I think it's
going to be very hard for the Israeli
leadership you know with the big
pressure we see from the public um for
the release of the hostages say well
actually that's not good enough we're
breaking off uh contact so there is a
chance that Hamas will try to leverage
this uh hostage deal formula for
furthering you know to extend the
ceasefire more and more and then by that
time what Hamas is hoping to achieve
within 10 days maybe even longer
International pressure on Israel will be
so so huge it's going to be very hard
for it to go back into fighting the
world in the meantime we'll see the the
mass Devastation in Gaza it will see the
real numbers of casualties as high as it
is right now there's still many you know
bodies buried under the rubble it's
going to be very hard for Israel Hamas
hopes at the end of it to go back to
what it's planning to do right now you
mentioned International pressure uh
there has been tremendous International
pressure on Israel to show restraint in
Gaza there pressure has been mounting on
Israel to introduce at least a temporary
ceasefire uh now we have that how much
of a factor is international pressure on
Israel in making this happen well so far
it was huge and and Israel played on it
they knew that the world wants to bring
more humanitarian Aid into Gaza and they
said okay we're talking humanitarian
needs our humanitarian need is to have
our hostages released and we're going to
use this card this is our leverage um
however you know we've seen a great
support from the Americans the European
uh countries have been supporting Israel
I'm not sure it's going to stand uh as
firm once we've see we see the great
Devastation and also um the biggest
contention point is that uh Biden really
wants to see some sort of plan for the
future of Gaza what is the end game
after the war is over who will take over
of Gaza who will take care of the 2.3
million Palestinians living there Israel
is country very reluctant to discuss
that and maybe if it brings out a plan
it's going to be able to gain more time
to have uh you know to have to complete
its military goals what about the
families of the hostages uh that Gaza is
is holding uh rather that the Hamas is
holding in Gaza those families have been
very vocal very active they've been
pressuring the Israeli government to are
they convinced uh about the Israeli
government's priorities in this
situation well for now yes but it's not
clear what's going to be happening next
you know I think there's great consensus
that that the families the young
children and the mothers the elderly
women there should be released there's a
fear that the that the war will not be
resumed or the attacks will be resumed
the Israel military operation will seize
that's one fear but then also at the
same time um there's so many great
dilemmas I mean bringing back the rest
there will be at least 180 left at the
end of this if the ceasefire is extended
bringing them back most of them are
Soldiers by Hamas definitions even um
even if you're not an active combat you
you're consider Kamas is considering any
male as as a as a soldier we've seen in
the past the pressure to bring R the
soldier on Israeli decision makers very
very strong it's going to be hard for
them to resist and that will require
very um painful moves but they going to
cost political um support for netan um
and today unlike what he did in 2011
with the Shalit deal his government is
run by extreme right um parties it's
going to be much harder for him to go
for a deal that brings swaps of heavy
terrorists sitting in Israel uh released
against Israeli
Soldiers
the is the Israeli Prime Minister Ben
yahu you mentioned uh him and his govern
his popularity is really low at this
point there polls show that many
Israelis simply do not trust him anymore
at this point how much of his political
career is staked on getting those
hostages out a lot of it I mean it's
clear you know Israel has been debating
within itself in the last 49 days what
would be the moment the Victorious
moment that they can take out there's no
doubt that without a hostages return
that's not going to happen so that's a
big part but um as long as the war is
still ongoing as long there active
fighting as long as there's so many dra
soldiers drafted U I don't think we'll
see a lot of movement in the political
um area and once that is done it's
really hard to tell where Israel will
find itself uh emotionally
psychologically nationally there's so
many factors it's clear that Israel is
not like it was until October 7th things
have shifted things have changed the
cards are still up in the air we don't
know exactly where they'll fall once
everything is over shie thank you very
much that was our Middle East anal shie
rosanes now as we've been discussing
some humanitarian Aid trucks have been
entering Gaza from Egypt this is the
scene live that you're looking at right
now at the Rafa border crossing Egypt
says 130,000 lers of diesel and four
trucks of uh of natural gas will be
delivered daily into Gaza including 200
lores of Aid boosting the amount of a
arriving at Gaza which the UN and other
agencies said is desperately needed in
the
territory now let's bring in James
Denzel here he's head of the of conflict
and humanitarian policy at save the
children UK and he joins us from London
thanks for being with us Aid trucks are
entering Gaza now what do organizations
like yours hope to achieve while this
truce
holds well AR we need to do so much and
inevitably we won't be able to do as
much as we would want because of the
restrictions uh both bureaucratic legal
political and physical in Gaza I think
your images of the Gaza Crossing show uh
Rafa Crossing show activity but we've
already got uh thousands of trucks
backlogged if you look at the average
numbers of trucks that would have gone
into Gaza 500 a day prior to the
horrendous events of October the 7th so
there's a massive backlog of course
we've had almost 50 days of complete
Carnage in Gaza that has had a huge
impact on the population 80% of whom
were a dependent prior to the events of
October the 7th we suspect that number
is now up to 100% uh and the most
important and immediate things that they
need are are life-saving Aid so clean
water food and shelter as the Gaza
winter
approaches now the we've we've had weeks
of bombardment and street fighting in
Gaza how much of a challenge is it going
to be to move the big trucks full of Aid
around inside the Gaza territory given
that maybe the roads aren't even
passable yeah it's such an important
question uh the devil is in the detail
when it comes to Aid Logistics uh and it
is not just a case of what is the Urban
infrastructure in terms of where trucks
can move where AID workers can move and
let's not forget Gaza is the most
dangerous place in the world to be an
aid worker over 100 un Aid workers have
been killed so there is a question about
where AID can get to there's also a
question about where uh it is most
needed and in particular uh tens of
thousands of of Palestinians and
children will remain in the north of
Gaza and there's huge question marks as
to whether this uh this humanitarian
pause this ceasefire or short ceasefire
will allow us to get to to people in the
north who who have been under the most
intense uh part of the uh the military
um
operations going on there so where AID
can get to is is crucial uh and and who
needs it the most is also incredibly
important talk to us about the needs of
the people in Gaza we know that it's a
desperate humanitarian situation there
what what do people in Gaza need most
right
now well the response needs everything
we'll obviously prioritize life- saving
Aid because that is uh what you do in
these kind of situations uh there's
aspects to an aid response that we don't
talk about because they're so far off
from being realized such as the fact
that uh Palestinian children in Gaza
have had almost seven weeks of of no
education but we're obviously so focused
on keeping people alive uh that that is
where attention lies understandably um
there is large numbers of Palestinian
children who have suffered uh injury
often life-changing injury um losing
limbs being unable to walk again having
significant organ damage huge question
mark as to whether they can get the
treatment they need from some of these
new field hospitals in the south of Gaza
or whether they will need to have
referral uh overseas or outside of Gaza
um then there's other aspects of care
that we really need to think about uh
Child Protection there's large numbers
of children who have been uh separated
from their family there's unfortunately
large numbers of children who have lost
their entire family and uh reports
coming in from hospitals of wounded
children no surviving relatives arriving
at A&E so uh Child Protection Services
nutrition services water and sanitation
in a part of the world where the water
supply was already hugely contaminated
and if you don't do not get power fuel
and water back on then you're back to
issues around people drinking dirty
water and waterborne diseases whether
that's from uh you know toilets or sea
waterer all sorts of stories that we're
hearing so the aid response is
multifaceted we all need weeks to even
start to address the needs of over 2
million people in Gaza yet of course we
only have a matter of
days okay we'll have to leave it there
James thank you very much for talking
with us that was James denzo from save
the
children